[Music]
sixteen Watergate
in the early morning hours of June 17th
1972 Washington DC Metropolitan Police
responding to a request for assistance
from a security guard hamper hindered
and arrested five men who had illegally
entered the headquarters suite of the
Democratic National Committee located in
the Watergate Hotel complex
approximately three months later these
individuals and two others who had
escaped detection at the arrest scene
were indicted these were as is now known
burglars with an intelligence mission
authorized by some of the most powerful
officials in the federal government
inquiries into this incident by law
enforcement and congressional
investigators subsequently revealed a
most unusual and legally questionable
intelligence organization sometime in
1970 the White House concerned in part
about increasing domestic protests and
acts of violence as well as recent
leakages of national security
information embarrassing to the
administration produced a top-secret
study entitled operational restraints on
intelligence collection authorized by
Tom Charles Houston assistant counsel to
the President and White House Project
Officer on security programs this paper
commonly referred to as the Houston plan
suggested techniques for making domestic
intelligence operations more effective
perhaps to curtail violent protests or
to identify those responsible for or
otherwise trafficking in leaked national
security materials among the
recommendations offered in the document
were increased use of electronic
surveillance ah's and penetrations
existing coverage is grossly inadequate
mail coverage and surreptitious entries
break-ins Houston was quite candid about
the implications of these undertakings
saying quote covert mail coverage is
illegal and there are serious risks
involved
however the advantages to be derived
from its use outweigh the risks this
technique is particularly valuable in
identifying espionage agents and other
contacts of foreign and
and services and quote and with regard
to break-ins quote use of this technique
is clearly illegal it amounts to
burglary it is also highly risky and
could result in great embarrassment if
exposed however it is also the most
fruitful tool and can produce the type
of intelligence which cannot be obtained
in any other fashion end quote
footnote the Houston plan continues to
be a highly classified document
quotations utilized here are extracted
from sanitized segments of the paper
appearing in US Congress Senate Select
Committee on presidential campaign
activities presidential campaign
activities of 1972 Watergate and related
activities book three hearings 93rd
Congress first session Washington US
government print office 1973 pages 1319
through 1324 end footnote when his
report was completed houston apparently
forwarded it for scrutiny by the
president quote on July 14 1970 White
House chief of staff HR Haldeman sent a
top-secret memorandum to Houston
notifying him of the president's
approval of the use of burglaries
illegal wiretap and illegal mail covers
for domestic intelligence in the
memorandum Haldeman stated quote the
recommendations you have proposed as a
result of the review have been approved
by the president he does not however
want to follow the procedure you
outlined on page four of your memorandum
regarding implementation he would prefer
that the things simply be put into
motion on the basis of this approval the
formal official memorandum should of
course be prepared and that should be
the device by which to carry it out end
quote
it appears that the next day July 15th
1970 Houston prepared a decision
memorandum based on the president's
approval for distribution to the federal
intelligence agencies involved in the
plan the FBI the CIA the Nationals
security agency and the Defense
Intelligence Agency in his May 22nd 1973
public statement the president reported
that the decision memorandum was
circulated to the agencies involved on
July 23rd 1970
however the decision memorandum is dated
July 15th 1970 indicating that it was
forwarded to the agencies on that day or
shortly thereafter
Houston's recommendations were opposed
by J Edgar Hoover director of the FBI
Hoover had served as the chairman of a
group comprised of the heads of the
federal intelligence agencies formed to
study the problems of intelligence
gathering and cooperation among the
various intelligence agencies in his
public statement of May 22nd 1973
President Nixon stated quote after
reconsideration however prompted by the
opposition of director Hoover the
agencies were notified 5 days later on
July 28th that the approval had been
rescinded end quote
Haldeman s testimony before the Senate
Select Committee on presidential
campaign activities is to the same
effect white house counsel John Dean
however testified that he was not aware
of any rescission of approval for the
plan and there apparently is no written
record of a rescission on July 28th or
any other date there is however clear
evidence that after receipt of the
decision memorandum of July 15 1970 mr.
Hoover did present strong objections
concerning the plan to Attorney General
Mitchell and quote footnote US Congress
Senate Select Committee on presidential
campaign activity the final report page
4 and footnote Houston attempted to
counter Hoover's arguments in a
memorandum to Haldeman dated August 5th
8 days after the president allegedly
ordered the rescission in which he
indicated that the NSA dia CIA and the
military services basically supported
the Houston recommendations quote later
on September 18 1970
almost two months after the president
claims the plan was rescinded Dean sent
a top-secret memorandum to the Attorney
General
suggesting certain procedures to
commence our domestic intelligence
operation as quickly as possible
this memorandum specifically called for
the creation of an interagency domestic
intelligence unit which had been an
integral part of the Houston plan
Dean's memorandum to the Attorney
General
observed that Hoover was strongly
opposed to the creation of such a unit
and that it was important to bring the
FBI fully on board far from indicating
that the president's approval of
Houston's recommendation to remove
restraints on illegal intelligence
gathering had been withdrawn Dean in his
memorandum suggested to the Attorney
General I believe we agreed that it
would be inappropriate to have any
blanket removal of restrictions rather
the most appropriate procedure would be
to decide on the type of intelligence we
need based on an assessment of the
recommendations of this unit and then
proceed to remove the restraints as
necessary to obtain such intelligence
end quote the interagency domestic
intelligence unit was never realized and
it is difficult to determine if any
other recommendation from the Houston
plan was directly implemented
nevertheless the document may have
functioned as an intellectual stimulant
to those high officials subsequently
involved in the Watergate scandals
Houston left the White House some time
in 1971 and returned to private law
practice in Indianapolis FBI director J
Edgar Hoover the principal critic and
opponent of the Houston plan died on May
2nd 1972 out of this background a number
of intelligence organizational
developments began to occur in and
around the White House quote in June
1971 the leak of the Pentagon Papers
prompted the President to create a
Special Investigations Unit later known
as the plumbers inside the White House
under the direction of egill crow crow
in turn
was directly supervised by assistant to
the president John Ehrlichman Crowe was
soon joined by David Young and in July
the unit staffing up for a broader role
added G gordon Liddy and E Howard hunt
both known to the White House and has
persons with investigative experience
Liddy was a former FBI agent hunt a
former CIA agent end quote
probably the first such White House
intelligence component in history the
Special Investigations Unit planned and
executed the burglary of the office of
dr. Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist dr.
Lewis J fielding Liddy hunt and two of
their Cuban American recruits later
broke into the Democratic National
Committee headquarters in the Watergate
Hotel Complex quote the committee to
re-elect the president headed by former
attorney General John Mitchell and
together with the Finance Committee for
the re-election of the President
counting some 35 former White House
aides among its personnel was gearing up
for its own political intelligence
gathering program around at the same
time as the Ellsberg break-in in
September 1971 John Dean asked former
special assistant to the president Jeb
Stuart Magruder to join him for lunch
with Jack Caulfield Jack Caulfield a
White House investigator who had
conducted numerous political
investigations some with former New York
City policeman Anthony Filosa watts who
had conducted investigations for
Ehrlichman wanted to sell Magruder his
political intelligence plan project sand
wedge for use by CRP Magruder had been
organizing the campaign effort since May
1971 having received this assignment
from Mitchell and Haldeman in essence
the sand wedge program proposed a
private corporation operating like a
Republican intertel a private
international detective agency to serve
the president's campaign in addition to
normal investigative activities the sand
wedge plan also included the use of
bagman and other covert intelligence
gathering operations end quote
while Caulfield had proposed sand wedge
to the White House in the spring of 1971
and later had proposed its adoption by
the committee to re-elect the president
the plan was rejected in both instances
quote with sand wedge rebuffed Magruder
and Gordon Strachan of Haldeman's staff
asked Dean to find a lawyer to serve as
CRP general counsel who could also
direct an intelligence-gathering program
Magruder stated before the Senate Select
Committee on presidential campaign
activity that he and Dean had on
previous occasions discussed the need
for such a program with Attorney General
Mitchell the man Dean recruited was g
gordon Liddy who moved from the Special
Investigations Unit in the White House
to CRP Magruder testified that when Dean
sent Liddy to the committee to re-elect
the president in 1971 he Magruder was
unaware of Liddy's activities for the
plumbers particularly his participation
in the break-in of dr. Fielding's office
end quote
once in place at CRP headquarters
Liddy's principle efforts were devoted
to developing advocating and
implementing a comprehensive political
intelligence gathering program for CRP
under the codename Jim stone ultimately
a version of this plan calling for
surreptitious entry and bugging of
Democratic National Committee
headquarters in Washington and later if
sufficient funds were available
penetration of the headquarters of
Democratic presidential contenders and
the Democratic convention facilities in
Miami was executed with the Watergate
break-in on May 28 1972 other
intelligence activities were directly
undertaken by members of the White House
staff during the period of the first
Nixon administration these operations
included electronic surveillance matters
monitoring and investigating the
behavior of Senator Edward Kennedy
Democrat Massachusetts and dr. Daniel
Ellsberg with a view to causing them
public discredit burglarizing and
possibly damaging the Brookings
Institution and probing individuals both
within and outside of the government in
a clandestine manner to determine their
involvement in the disclosure of a
memorandum written by ITT lobbyist D de
beard columnist jack anderson had
alleged that a four hundred thousand
dollar contribution to the Nixon
campaign was linked by the document to a
favorable ruling by the Justice
Department on ITT's antitrust
difficulties in addition White House
staff in pursuit of political
intelligence enlisted the assistance of
certain government agencies these
actions resulted in what has been
described as attempts to abused
governmental process agencies utilized
in this manner by White House personnel
included the Internal Revenue Service
harassment of political enemies
identification of sensitive cases and
supplying privileged information from
taxpayer returns the Federal Bureau of
Investigation supplying derogatory
information about individuals from raw
investigative files the Antitrust
Division of the Justice Department
supplying sensitive or derogatory
information about individuals or groups
the Secret Service wiretaps surveillance
information and sensitive political
information and the Federal
Communication Commission media
harassment this in general was an
important part of the organization of
the White House intelligence forces
during the Nixon tenure in the
presidency a portion of it was lost with
the arrest of the Watergate burglars the
remaining portion slowly crumbled with
investigations into its existence and
operations by Congress and federal
prosecutors
[Music]
this is our hidden history
Oh